---
student_name: [Ida Welén]
topic: [EU and the DC-EDIC - the influence of digital commons]
---
Your content goes here. Please use [markdown](https://docs.github.com/fr/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github) for formating.

# The importance of digital commons in the EU’s race for competitiveness and sovereignty -  the challenges for the DC-EDIC
The focus of the EU:s digital agenda is to increase European digital sovereignty and competitiveness. To reach this, the EU promotes building a EuroStack with decreased dependency on non-European building blocks. The DC-EDIC is the first permanent consortium for EU member states to support European-based commons, providing a necessary step for digital sovereignty. This policy brief addresses three challenges in the EU’s current work with commons and proposes focus areas for the DC-EDIC. How can we increase the influence of digital commons in the EU?

## Challenge 1: The EU’s divided and commons-unfriendly approach 
By creating its own office, commons-license, and setting up goals in multiple Open Source Strategies, the EU intends to promote digital commons through its institutional structures. Even though the EU’s policies express support for digital commons, the actual procurement from the EU favor “foreign proprietary vendors” over European commons, limiting sovereignty and the influence of commons. The Commission protects European principles through regulations for digital platforms (DMA, DSA, and others). Whether the regulations potentially harm digital commons by setting up restrictions on content for large platforms or are important for limiting gatekeepers from dominating the markets is disputable. Within these two areas, the EU’s approach seems divided - the policies support digital commons while EU regulatory and institutional structures are not fully aligned with open-source development. 

The DC-EDIC provides maintenance support, assists in securing financing, and contributes to strategic developments for digital commons. Through these competences, it assists commons in how to act in line with the EU’s digital rulebook. However, this brief argues that the regulations were seemingly not created with commons in mind. For example, limiting specific content on a community-driven platform is not feasible. Neither do the EU’s procurement processes prioritize commons, as proprietary industry often is favored. The EU needs to further integrate digital commons in its regulation making processes, something which the DC-EDIC, by creating a European commons community, potentially could have a bigger impact on. Support in managing the EU regulations is a first step - but the limitations due to the EU’s ambiguity is evident and needs to be addressed. 

## Challenge 2: The EU’s funding limitations
Even though digital commons are included in the EU’s vision, the main shortcoming on the EU-level is the lack of coordination - addressed directly by the establishment of the DC-EDIC. The current funding through the Next Generation Internet (NGI) is fragmented, supporting individual projects over a specific time period, which surely promotes commons but does not stabilize and develop them. The NGI is to be replaced by the Open Internet Stack (OIS) and uncertainties remain regarding future funding structures for digital commons, as the NGI “bottom-up” structure will be altered. The OIS’s main objective is EU policy development to promote a strategic use of digital commons and compliance with EU-regulations. Will leaving the NGI’s “fragmented” approach  result in fewer innovative European commons projects, limiting competitiveness in the long run? 

By setting up a One-Stop-Shop, gathering funding opportunities, the DC-EDIC targets an area which could solve the fragmentation of the NGI-approach. However, will this fully replace the role of the NGI? As the implementation of the OIS is still ongoing, the consequences for new commons projects currently supported by initiatives like NGI Zero are still unknown. The DC-EDIC  bridges the gap between the needs of member states and digital commons development, letting the member states' interests lead the development and contribute to more targeted commons-development. This policy brief does not criticize this approach, but raises the question whether the OIS’s and the DC-EDIC’s more “top-down” approach, with strategic interests driving innovation, potentially loses the possibility of new innovative bottom-up suggestions.

## Challenge 3: The importance of choice and limited focus on digital commons
The current geopolitical changes with Russia threatening European security, a US decoupling from the EU, and China competing in critical areas directs the EU to “Open Strategic Autonomy” as the key for the future. The urgency is visible by the Commission already backtracking their  regulatory frameworks through the Digital Omnibus. Digital Commons could play an important role in this transition by providing open alternatives to secure longevity for strategic sectors that now are dependent on US technology. The undefined importance of open-source solutions for competitiveness and sovereignty constrains the position of digital commons’ in the EU. 

The DC-EDIC enters new ground addressing the collaboration and temporality of previous initiatives, and offers a solution to increase the impact of commons for European competitiveness with the member states in the frontline. However, as of now, the EU is not prioritizing digital commons in their fast development towards competitiveness and sovereignty, even though commons could be a viable solution. In line with Challenge 1, this brief sees the EU’s approach as fragmented: introducing new commons initiatives, as the DC-EDIC, but letting commons develop on the sideline of the push for sovereignty. It argues that the dedication is unsatisfactory. Both the EU and European companies need to choose to trust European based commons to cut the cords with the US. Letting the interests of member states drive the commons innovation could improve this by providing more in-demand commons, but more advocacy to use digital commons instead of proprietary sources is necessary - both on EU and member state level. 

## Executive summary
The influence of digital commons should be addressed through: 
1. Adopting the non-optimal EU regulatory framework to commons
2. Guaranteeing funding possibilities for bottom-up innovations 
3. Making European companies choose digital commons

[Link](put link here)
